The Dark side of Light.

Darkness is one of the most profound forces to shape nature, with half of the globe always being in darkness. The day is only half the story.

New research shows that the last century of artificial light pollution is an environmental hazard that is causing our circadian rhythms — which have evolved since the beginning of time — to go haywire.

It's no wonder our chronobiological clocks are discombobulated. After relying on the sun, moon, and stars to guide our waking and sleeping hours for millennia, it's been less than 100 years since humans en masse have been exposed to artificial lighting—which has become omnipresent in the early 21st century.

Life on Earth evolved around a 24-hour day with roughly 12 hours of daylight followed by 12 hours of dark; and many biological processes follow this circadian rhythm. In mammals, this “clock” is controlled by the hypothalamus but is also affected by external factors, mainly light.

Receptors in the eye receive information on light and send signals that influence sleep, mood and memory.

The production of melatonin, is also ruled by the circadian rhythm so that it is synthesized almost exclusively at night. This hormone sends signals to the rest of the body to tell whether it is day or night and promotes sleep. Melatonin also has other important roles as an antioxidant and a protective agent against “wear and tear” in tissues.

Exposure to light in late evening, at night or early morning disrupts the circadian rhythm and the production of melatonin, and hence has an effect on sleep, mood and cognition. Severe disruption of circadian rhythms is linked to breast cancer and could also play an important role in the development of breast, prostate, endometrial, ovary, colorectal and skin cancers; cardiovascular diseases, reproduction, endometriosis, gastrointestinal and digestive problems, diabetes, obesity, depression and sleep deprivation.

Skyglow.

Images from space over the past two decades reveal the extent to which the night is disappearing. Estimates suggest that more than 10% of the planet’s land area experiences artificial light at night — and that rises to 23% if skyglow is included. The extent of artificially lit outdoor areas spread by 2% every year from 2012 to 2016.

Effects on our ecology.

The trend has had profound impacts on some species; lights are well known to disorient migrating birds and sea turtles, for example. Scientists have also found that disappearing darkness disturbs the behaviour of crickets, moths and bats, and even increases disease transmission in birds.

The most lethal effects are perhaps on insects — vital food sources and pollinators in many ecosystems. An estimate of the effects of street lamps in Germany suggested that the light could wipe out more than 60 billion insects over a single summer. Some insects fly straight into lamps and sizzle; some collapse after circling them for hours.

Fewer studies have examined plants, but those that have suggest that light is disrupting them, too. In a study in the United Kingdom5, scientists took a 13-year record of the timing of bud opening in trees, and matched it up with satellite imagery of night-time lighting. After controlling for urban heat, they found that artificial lighting was linked with trees bursting their buds more than a week earlier — a magnitude similar to that predicted for 2 °C of global warming.

Much of Earth remains free of direct artificial light, but skyglow — light that is scattered back to Earth by aerosols and clouds — is more widespread. It can be so faint that humans can’t see it, but researchers say it could still threaten the 30% of vertebrates and 60% of invertebrates that are nocturnal and exquisitely sensitive to light.

Sunlight exposure.

The artificial light available in an office (~100 foot candles) at eye level is only around 10 percent of the light available in the shade of a tree on a sunny day. The amount of light we are exposed for 16 hours in office is equivalent to 1 hour of expose to a sunny day.

Screen exposure.

Viewing bright screens (as in from a phone, computer or tablet) at night can significantly impact the time we start to feel sleepy and eventually fall asleep. This is because viewing screens increases alertness and inhibits the secretion of melatonin. Research tells us that viewing screens at night effects sleep, circadian patterns (sleep/wake cycle) and unsurprisingly, next morning alertness.

Screens have a particular type of light that makes them bright and this light mimics the effects of sunlight on the brain. In other words, when we view a bright screen our brain thinks it’s the morning sun and wakes itself up by inhibiting melatonin.




The rising and setting of the sun influences every cell in our bodies and is literally hardwired into your neurobiology. Almost every organism on earth—from single-cell algae to humans—has an internal circadian clock that corresponds closely with the seasonal 24-hour cycles of darkness and light.

Human sleep patterns are largely governed by our internal circadian clock. In humans and animals, circadian patterns follow a 24-hour cycle which is directed by the circadian control center of the brain, called the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), located in the hypothalamus.

In 2013, researchers at MIT reported that when circadian rhythm are thrown off, health problems including obesity and metabolic disorders such as diabetes can arise. People who work night shifts have an increased susceptibility to obesity and diabetes. The researchers at MIT also discovered a link between a disruption in circadian cycles and aging. In a statement,Leonard Guarente senior author of the paper said,

"Just about everything that takes place physiologically is really staged along the circadian cycle. What's now emerging is the idea that maintaining the circadian cycle is quite important in health maintenance, and if it gets broken, there's a penalty to be paid in health and perhaps in aging."

Ideally, your daily waking and sleeping schedule should flow with seasonal fluctuations based on when the sun rises and sets in your region of the world or zip code. Of course, scheduling your life based on rising and setting of the sun is basically impossible for most of us living in a modern society, which doesn't make circadian rhythms a top priority.

Lastly, a May 2016 study found that smartphone use combined with social networking late at night is disrupting the natural circadian rhythms and sleep patterns for people of all ages and nationalities around the globe. Smartphone use during the day obviously leads to excessive screen time, but bedtime use of any digital technology exposes you to more artificial light, throws off your SCN, and exacerbates sleep disturbances.


In June 2016, the latest New World Atlas of Artificial Night Sky Brightness report was published stating that one-third of the Earth’s population cannot see the Milky Way. For those of us living in North America, a staggering 80% of the U.S. population cannot clearly see the nighttime constellations. The excessive amount of light pollution in our homes, towns, and cities is affecting our health on a global scale.

Today, a new animal study from the Netherlands reports that constant exposure to light triggered pro-inflammatory activation of the immune system, muscle loss, and early signs of osteoporosis.




https://www.heysigmund.com/impact-screens-sleep/
https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-018-00665-7
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26375320
https://www.supermemo.com/en/archives1990-2015/articles/sleep